% Machine Learning for Enhanced Electronic Trigger Detection of Diagnostic Errors in the Emergency Department

Andrew J. Zimolzak, Max Yu, Angela Wu, Li Wei, Devika Subramanian,
Usman Mir, Ashish Gupta, Viral Vaghani, Adel Hassan, Justin Mower,
Hardeep Singh

Due May 2. Sci abstracts 400 words. Really **2800 characters** and
newline counts as two :( . Title 100 char max. Optional: one figure or
table (upload) if abstract 350 words. Currently at approx 2886 words.

# Abstract




Background: Electronic triggers (e-triggers) have been used
extensively to find cases of diagnostic error in large databases, but
they have several limitations. First, they identify patterns that are
only suggestive---not definitive---of error. This means that e-trigger
predictive value is imperfect, and time-consuming manual chart review
is required to separate e-trigger outputs into true and false
instances of missed opportunities for diagnosis (MOD). Second,
e-triggers are often designed from first principles, rather than based
on empiric data patterns, so they may not detect all signals of MOD.
Machine learning (ML) is a promising approach to enhance e-trigger
predictive value and emulate human chart reviewers at larger scale.
Therefore, we sought to create an e-trigger with enhanced accuracy,
where records flagged by a first-stage traditional e-trigger are
further separated by a second-stage ML classifier into true and false
MODs.

Methods: Based on the input of an expert panel, we designed a
rules-based electronic trigger to find possible MOD, in the emergency
department. Specifically, we found cases of an index ER visit with
dizziness or vertigo, in patients with high risk for stroke, and
discharge from ER to home, followed by subsequent hospital admission.
Trained clinicians reviewed a random sample of charts flagged by the
e-trigger and labeled each as MOD or no MOD. Labeled charts were used
to train ML methods including regularized logistic regression and
random forests. ML had access to demographics, lab values, vital
signs, medications, test orders, and encounter diagnoses; from the
index ER visit, prior, and subsequent visits.

Results: The rules-based e-trigger flagged 82 records as possible MOD.
Chart review showed 38 of those to be true positive (46% PPV). The
best-performing ML algorithm correctly identified 37 of these 38 true
positives and 43 of 44 true negatives (97% PPV). It misclassified one
positive and one negative case.

Conclusions: We successfully applied machine learning to enhance the
accuracy of an electronic method to find missed opportunities for
diagnosis. We found improved predictive value while missing relatively
few cases of true MOD. Limitations include time needed for preparation
of variables used by the ML, although once this is done, the algorithm
can run at large scale. Next steps can include applying this two-stage
approach to multiple other rules-based e-triggers for diagnostic
error.
