% Development, implementation, and validation of two cancer diagnosis digital quality measures, and association with mortality

Andrew J. Zimolzak, Paarth Kapadia, Daniel R. Murphy, Divvy Upadhyay,
Umair Mushtaq, Usman Mir, Alexis Offner, Saritha Korukonda, Riyaa
Murugaesh Rekha, Gary Abel, Georgios Lyratzopoulos, Luke Mounce, Hardeep
Singh

# Background

In the US, 1/3 of patients with cancer experience a missed or delayed
diagnosis, and cancer is a leading cause of malpractice claims. However,
missed opportunities in diagnosis (MODs) that drive these outcomes are
not easily detected in existing data. The Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services recently emphasized the need for digital quality
measures (dQMs). Therefore, we developed, implemented, and validated two
outcome dQMs for cancer diagnosis at two US health systems. dQMs can
serve as proxy measures of breakdowns in cancer diagnosis and inform
interventions.

# Methods

We adapted emergency presentation definition used in England, and a
late-stage (III/IV) definition, while using the Safer Dx Trigger Tools
Framework for developing electronic safety algorithms. We consulted a
panel of physicians, quality professionals, system leaders, and
patients, to establish dQM criteria. We developed two dQMs (cancer
emergency presentation and late-stage presentation) based on electronic
health record data. Emergency presentation (EP) was defined as
*emergency department visit or unplanned inpatient admission, followed
by first cancer diagnosis within 30 days*. We applied the dQMs to
patients with lung and colorectal cancer (CRC) at Veterans Affairs (VA)
and Geisinger during 2016--2020.

Two clinicians reviewed a sample of EP and late-stage records from 2019
at both sites using standard forms to assess dQM accuracy (e.g., whether
the emergency visit was truly for cancer symptoms) and for MODs (e.g.,
whether a past visit for hemoptysis was likely cancer-related). We
analyzed survival stratified by dQM.

# Results

At VA, EPs were seen in 3,401/14,674 cases (23%) of CRC and 8,039/37,691
(21%) lung cancers. Late-stage presentations were seen in 36% of CRC and
46% of lung cancer. Chart review showed dQM accuracy â‰¥70% across
measures and MODs in 50--81% of cases. EP of CRC had 1-year all-cause
mortality of 31.3%, significantly higher than non-EP, with 12.9%.
Likewise, EP of lung cancer had 56.1% mortality, versus non-EP with
32.1%.

# Conclusions

We used large data warehouses to implement and validate 2 outcome dQMs
of cancer diagnosis in 2 US health care systems. Emergency and
late-stage presentation are common, can be detected at large scale, and
are associated with MODs and mortality, representing a high signal for
opportunities for improvement. Health systems can use diagnostic dQMs to
identify high- or low-performing sites to learn from them, or to track
performance over time. To our knowledge, these are the first two dQMs to
focus specifically on diagnostic quality.
